Low-rank Adaptation,
or LoRA for short,
is a parameter-efficient
fine-tuning technique that
falls into the
re-parameterization category.
Let's take a look
at how it works.
As a quick reminder,
here's the diagram of
the transformer
architecture that
you saw earlier in the course.
The input prompt is
turned into tokens,
which are then converted to
embedding vectors and passed
into the encoder and/or decoder
parts of the transformer.
In both of these components,
there are two kinds
of neural networks;
self-attention and
feedforward networks.
The weights of these networks
are learned during pre-training.
After the embedding
vectors are created,
they're fed into the
self-attention layers where
a series of weights are applied
to calculate the
attention scores.
During full fine-tuning,
every parameter in these
layers is updated.
LoRA is a strategy that
reduces the number of
parameters to be trained
during fine-tuning by freezing
all of the original model
parameters and then
injecting a pair of
rank decomposition matrices
alongside the original weights.
The dimensions of
the smaller matrices
are set so that their product
is a matrix with
the same dimensions
as the weights
they're modifying.
You then keep the
original weights of
the LLM frozen and train
the smaller matrices using
the same supervised
learning process
you saw earlier this week.
For inference, the two low-rank
matrices are multiplied
together to create a matrix with
the same dimensions as
the frozen weights.
You then add this to the
original weights and
replace them in the model
with these updated values.
You now have a LoRA
fine-tuned model
that can carry out
your specific task.
Because this model has
the same number of
parameters as the original,
there is little to no impact
on inference latency.
Researchers have
found that applying
LoRA to just the
self-attention layers of
the model is often enough to
fine-tune for a task and
achieve performance gains.
However, in principle,
you can also use LoRA on
other components like
the feed-forward layers.
But since most of
the parameters of
LLMs are in the
attention layers,
you get the biggest savings in
trainable parameters by applying
LoRA to these weights matrices.
Let's look at a
practical example using
the transformer
architecture described in
the Attention is
All You Need paper.
The paper specifies that
the transformer weights
have dimensions of 512 by 64.
This means that
each weights matrix
has 32,768 trainable parameters.
If you use LoRA as
a fine-tuning method with
the rank equal to eight,
you will instead train
two small rank
decomposition matrices
whose small dimension is eight.
This means that Matrix A will
have dimensions of 8 by 64,
resulting in 512
total parameters.
Matrix B will have
dimensions of 512 by 8,
or 4,096 trainable parameters.
By updating the weights of
these new low-rank matrices
instead of the original weights,
you'll be training 4,608
parameters instead of
32,768 and 86% reduction.
Because LoRA allows
you to significantly
reduce the number of
trainable parameters,
you can often perform
this method of
parameter efficient
fine tuning with
a single GPU and avoid
the need for a distributed
cluster of GPUs.
Since the rank-decomposition
matrices are small,
you can fine-tune a different
set for each task and then
switch them out
at inference time
by updating the weights.
Suppose you train a pair of
LoRA matrices for
a specific task;
let's call it Task A.
To carry out inference
on this task,
you would multiply these
matrices together and
then add the resulting matrix
to the original frozen weights.
You then take this new
summed weights matrix
and replace the original weights
where they appear in your model.
You can then use this model to
carry out inference on Task A.
If instead, you
want to carry out
a different task, say Task B,
you simply take the
LoRA matrices you
trained for this task,
calculate their product,
and then add this matrix to
the original weights and
update the model again.
The memory required to store
these LoRA matrices
is very small.
So in principle, you can use
LoRA to train for many tasks.
Switch out the weights
when you need to use them,
and avoid having to store
multiple full-size
versions of the LLM.
How good are these models?
Let's use the ROUGE
metric you learned about
earlier this week to
compare the performance of
a LoRA fine-tune model to
both an original base model
and a full fine-tuned version.
Let's focus on fine-tuning
the FLAN-T5 for
dialogue summarization,
which you explored
earlier in the week.
Just to remind you,
the FLAN-T5-base model
has had an initial set of
full fine-tuning carried out
using a large
instruction data set.
First, let's set a
baseline score for
the FLAN-T5 base model and
the summarization data
set we discussed earlier.
Here are the ROUGE scores
for the base model where
a higher number indicates
better performance.
You should focus on
the ROUGE 1 score
for this discussion,
but you could use any of
these scores for comparison.
As you can see, the
scores are fairly low.
Next, look at the scores
for a model that has had
additional full fine-tuning
on dialogue summarization.
Remember, although FLAN-T5
is a capable model,
it can still benefit from
additional fine-tuning
on specific tasks.
With full fine-tuning,
you update every way in
the model during
supervised learning.
You can see that this results in
a much higher ROUGE 1 score
increasing over the base
FLAN-T5 model by 0.19.
The additional round of
fine-tuning has greatly improved
the performance of the model
on the summarization task.
Now let's take a
look at the scores
for the LoRA fine-tune model.
You can see that
this process also
resulted in a big
boost in performance.
The ROUGE 1 score
has increased from
the baseline by 0.17.
This is a little lower than
full fine-tuning, but not much.
However, using LoRA for
fine-tuning trained a
much smaller number of
parameters than full fine-tuning
using significantly
less compute,
so this small trade-off in
performance may
well be worth it.
You might be wondering
how to choose
the rank of the LoRA matrices.
This is a good question and
still an active
area of research.
In principle, the
smaller the rank,
the smaller the number
of trainable parameters,
and the bigger the
savings on compute.
However, there are some issues
related to model
performance to consider.
In the paper that
first proposed LoRA,
researchers at
Microsoft explored
how different choices of
rank impacted the
model performance
on language generation tasks.
You can see the summary of the
results in the table here.
The table shows the rank of
the LoRA matrices in
the first column,
the final loss
value of the model,
and the scores for
different metrics,
including BLEU and ROUGE.
The bold values indicate
the best scores that were
achieved for each metric.
The authors found a plateau in
the loss value for
ranks greater than 16.
In other words, using
larger LoRA matrices didn't
improve performance.
The takeaway here is that
ranks in the range of 4-32 can
provide you with a good
trade-off between reducing
trainable parameters and
preserving performance.
Optimizing the choice of rank is
an ongoing area of research and
best practices may evolve as
more practitioners like
you make use of LoRA.
LoRA is a powerful
fine-tuning method
that achieves great performance.
The principles behind
the method are
useful not just
for training LLMs,
but for models in other domains.
The final path method
that you'll explore this
week doesn't change
the LLM at all and instead
focuses on training
your input text.
Join me in the next
video to learn more.